---
title: HTML 101
layout: single
classes: wide
sidebar:
    nav: "webworkshop"
header:
    overlay_image: /assets/img/htmlstockphoto.jpg
    overlay_filter: 0.6
---
JavaScript has quite a turbulent end interesting history.[^1]
Some people love it, some hate it.
Whatever your opinion about JS is, it is one of the most popular languages out there.
According to the [2022 Stack Overflow Developer Survey](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022/#most-popular-technologies-language), it is the most commonly used programming language.

JavaScript was originally designed for and is still used for writing code that runs on webpages.
JavaScript run natively in your browser and has many convenient features for manipulating data on webpages.
For example, JavaScript makes it easy to write asynchronous logic, which is very commonly used for interacting with web servers.
We can also use JavaScript to manipulate elements on the page using the Document Object Model API (DOM) exposed by the browser.

The syntax of JavaScript is likely similar to other languages that you have seen before.
Let's jump in and implement the hint feature of our app using JavaScript.

We can add JavaScript to our page by adding a `script` element to the `head` like this:
{% highlight html %}
<head>
    <!-- Other elements -->
    <script>
        //JS goes here
    </script>
</head>
{% endhighlight %}


{% highlight html %}
<head>
    <!-- Other elements -->
    <script>
        function get_hint() {
            fetch("/get_hint.php")
                .then((response) => response.text())
                .then((text) => {
                    alert(text);
                });
        }
    </script>
</head>
{% endhighlight %}

[^1]: [Allen Wirfs-Brock and Brendan Eich. 2020. JavaScript: the first 20 years. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4, HOPL, Article 77 (June 2020), 189 pages.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3386327)

